docs: add cilium-operator technical overview documentation (#14530)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/cilium_operator.rst

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

Cilium Operator
===============

.. note:: This document provides a technical overview of the Cilium
          operator and describes the cluster-wide operations it is
          responsible for.

The operator being an integral part of cilium installation in Kubernetes
environments requires a robust deployment in the cluster. The cilium
operator uses the Kubernetes leader election library in conjunction with
lease locks to provide a HA cluster of cilium-operator instances. The
capability is supported on Kubernetes versions 1.14 and above and is

> Cilium's default behavior since the 1.9 release.

Reviewer: Perhaps the leader election should  be in a section. This paragraph gives the impression that Cilium Operator only works in Kubernetes >= 1.14

The number of replicas for the HA deployment can be configured using
Helm option ``operator.replicas``.

.. code:: bash

    $ helm install cilium cilium/cilium --version 1.9.0 \
        --namespace kube-system \

>         --set operator.replicas=3

Reviewer: This code should be similar to the one we have in our GSG, i.e., the `helm` install command is different if users are checking `/latest` or `/v1.9`.

    $ kubectl get deployment cilium-operator -n kube-system
    NAME              READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
    cilium-operator   3/3     3            3           46s

The operator, on behalf of Cilium, handles the below described

> cluster-wide operations:

Reviewer: `on behalf of Cilium` is a little bit misleading. Should be `The Cilium Operator manages the following operations:`

CRD Registration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The default behavior of cilium-operator is to register the CRDs used by

> Cilium on startup. The following custom resources are registered by

Reviewer: We can remove the ` on startup`

> cilium-operator:

Reviewer: Perhaps would make sense to inform the user what flag it can pass to the operator (and helm) to avoid registering the CRDs.

Author: Currently, we don't have any helm variable to configure the behavior of CRD registration. Should I just add the `cilium-operator` command-line argument that can be used for this?

Reviewer: I've created this to have as a follow up https://github.com/cilium/cilium/issues/15262

-  CiliumNetworkPolicy
-  CiliumClusterwideNetworkPolicy
-  CiliumEndpoint
-  CiliumNode
-  CiliumExternalWorkload
-  CiliumIdentity
-  CiliumLocalRedirectPolicy

IPAM
~~~~

Cilium-Operator is responsible for IP address management when running in
the following modes:

-  IPAM Azure
-  IPAM ENI

> -  IPAM ClusterPool

Reviewer: Add a link to the documentation for these modes.

> When running in IPAM mode ``Kubernetes`` the allocation CIDRs used by

Reviewer: Add a link to the documentation for the Kubernetes mode.

> ``cilium-agent`` is populated by using Kubernetes Node resource.

Reviewer: `from the fields `podCIDR` and `podCIDRs` populated by Kubernetes in the Kubernetes Node resource.`

> For ``crd`` IPAM allocation mode, it is the job of custom operator

Reviewer: `custom operator` -> `custom operator, such as: "cilium-operator-aws", "cilium-operator-azure"`

handling the IPAM to populate the required information about CIDRs in
the ``CiliumNode`` resource.

For more information on IPAM visit :ref:`address_management`.

KVStore operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These operations are performed only when KVStore is enabled for the
operator. In addition KVStore operations are only required when
``cilium-operator`` is running with any of the below options:

*  ``--synchronize-k8s-services``
*  ``--synchronize-k8s-nodes``
*  ``--identity-allocation-mode=kvstore``

K8s Services synchronization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Cilium operator performs the job of synchronizing Kubernetes services to
external KVstore configured for the operator if running with
``--synchronize-k8s-services`` flag.

The operator performs this operation only for shared services(services
that have io.cilium/shared-service annotation set to true).

> 

Reviewer: Might be worth mentioning that this is mainly used in clustermesh.

K8s Nodes synchronization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Similar to K8s services, we also synchronize K8s nodes information to

Reviewer: `s/we/Cilium Operator`

> Similar to K8s services, we also synchronize K8s nodes information to

Reviewer: `s/K8s/Kubernetes`

the shared KVstore. Again, this is done using a controller in the
operator where we watch for changes to node objects from K8s and sync

> them to KVstore.

Reviewer: The user doesn't need to know internal details about "controllers"

When a ``Node`` object is deleted it is not possible to reliably cleanup
the corresponding ``CiliumNode`` object from the agent itself. The operator

> holds the responsibility to respond to node delete events in the cluster

Reviewer: I would omit the `respond` and simply write: The operator holds the responsibility to garbage collect orphaned ``CiliumNodes``.

and garbage collect orphaned ``CiliumNodes``.

CNP/CCNP node status GC
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Similar to the effect of ``Node`` object deletion on ``CiliumNode``, we

Reviewer: `s/we/Cilium Operator`

cannot remove the status corresponding to a node in a CNP/CCNP object.
This operation of node status garbage collection from CNP/CCNP objects

> is also performed from the operator instead of the ``cilium-agent``.

Reviewer: It's worth mentioning that this option can be disabled if `disable-cnp-status-updates` is set to true.

Heartbeat update
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The operator periodically updates the Cilium's heartbeat path key
with the current time. The default key for this heartbeat is
``cilium/.heartbeat`` in the KVStore. It is used by agents to validate
that kvstore updates can be received.

Policy status update
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Cilium operator performs the operation of CNP/CCNP node status updates
when ``k8s-events-handover`` is enabled. This is done to optimize
Kubernetes events handling in case of large clusters. For the node
status updates to be handled by ``cilium-operator``, all the K8s events
are mirrored to the KVstore, which are then used to perform operations
via the operator. This operation is performed for both
CiliumNetworkPolicy and CiliumClusterwideNetworkPolicy objects.

For each CNP/CCNP object in the cluster, we start a status handler. This
handler periodically updates the node statuses for the CNP/CCNP objects
with the status of the policy in the corresponding node.

Identity Garbage Collection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Each workload in Kubernetes is assigned a security Identity that is used

Reviewer: `s/security Identity/security identity`

-  CRD Identity allocation
-  KVStore Identity allocation

Both the mechanisms of identity allocation requires the
``cilium-operator`` to perform the Garbage collection of stale
identities. This garbage collection is necessary because a 16-bit
unsigned integer represents the security identity, and thus we can only
have a maximum of 65536 identities in the cluster.

CRD Identity GC
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

CRD identity allocation uses Kubernetes custom resource
``CiliumIdentity`` to represent a security identity. This is the default
behaviour of Cilium and works out of the box in any K8s environment
without any external dependency.

The cilium operator maintains a local cache for CiliumIdentities with
the last time they were seen active. A controller runs in the background
periodically which scans this local cache and deletes identities that
have not had their heartbeat life sign updated since
``identity-heartbeat-timeout``.

One thing to note here is that an Identity is always assumed to be live
if it has an endpoint associated with it.

KVStore Identity GC
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

While the CRD allocation mode for identities is more common, it is

> limited in terms of scale. When running in a very large environment, the

Reviewer: let's put a reference for the scalability report that we have.

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

Cilium Operator
===============

.. note:: This document provides a technical overview of the Cilium
          operator and describes the cluster-wide operations it is

>           responsible for.

Reviewer 2: Nit, does this need to be a note? Seems like this is just the summary text you'd expect at the top of the document. As nice as the callout boxes make the docs look, overusing them too much will encourage users to ignore them when there's really something important we want to call out.

Author: Yeah, that makes sense actually. Thanks for pointing this out, I have updated the pull request to not have this as a note.

Highly Available Cilium Operator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Cilium operator uses Kubernetes leader election library in conjunction with

> lease locks to provide a HA cluster of cilium-operator instances. The

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
lease locks to provide HA functionality. The
```

> capability is supported on Kubernetes versions 1.14 and above and is
> Cilium's default behavior since the 1.9 release.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
capability is supported on Kubernetes versions 1.14 and above. It is
Cilium's default behavior since the 1.9 release.
```

The number of replicas for the HA deployment can be configured using
Helm option ``operator.replicas``.

.. parsed-literal::

    helm install cilium |CHART_RELEASE| \\
      --namespace kube-system \\
      --set operator.replicas=3

.. code:: bash

    $ kubectl get deployment cilium-operator -n kube-system
    NAME              READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
    cilium-operator   3/3     3            3           46s

The operator is an integral part of Cilium installations in Kubernetes
environments and is tasked to perform the following operations:

CRD Registration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The default behavior of cilium-operator is to register the CRDs used by
Cilium. The following custom resources are registered by cilium-operator:

-  CiliumNetworkPolicy
-  CiliumClusterwideNetworkPolicy
-  CiliumEndpoint
-  CiliumNode
-  CiliumExternalWorkload
-  CiliumIdentity
-  CiliumLocalRedirectPolicy

IPAM
~~~~

> Cilium-Operator is responsible for IP address management when running in

Reviewer 4: Nit: we should either refer this as either `cilium-operator` or Cilium Operator or Operator, and be consistent with it

```suggestion
Cilium Operator is responsible for IP address management when running in
```

the following modes:

-  :ref:`ipam_azure`
-  :ref:`ipam_eni`
-  :ref:`ipam_crd_cluster_pool`

> When running in IPAM mode :ref:`k8s_hostscope` the allocation CIDRs used by

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When running in IPAM mode :ref:`k8s_hostscope`, the allocation CIDRs used by
```

``cilium-agent`` is derived from the fields ``podCIDR`` and ``podCIDRs``
populated by Kubernetes in the Kubernetes ``Node`` resource.

For :ref:`concepts_ipam_crd` IPAM allocation mode, it is the job of custom
operator, such as: "cilium-operator-aws", "cilium-operator-azure" to populate

> the required information about CIDRs in the ``CiliumNode`` resource.

Reviewer 4: "custom operator" is confusing. I think we can just say "Cloud-specific Operator" or something similar. Maybe a separate paragraph which describes the different operator binaries to provide context for the reader, before we get to this highlighted section.

Author: Make sense, I have updated the paragraph.

For more information on IPAM visit :ref:`address_management`.

KVStore operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These operations are performed only when KVStore is enabled for the

> operator. In addition KVStore operations are only required when

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
operator. In addition, KVStore operations are only required when
```

``cilium-operator`` is running with any of the below options:

-  ``--synchronize-k8s-services``
-  ``--synchronize-k8s-nodes``
-  ``--identity-allocation-mode=kvstore``

K8s Services synchronization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Cilium operator performs the job of synchronizing Kubernetes services to
external KVstore configured for the operator if running with

> ``--synchronize-k8s-services`` flag.

Reviewer 4: Here as well with how to refer to the operator consistently

> The operator performs this operation only for shared services(services

Reviewer 4: Here as well

> The operator performs this operation only for shared services(services

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The operator performs this operation only for shared services (services
```

that have ``io.cilium/shared-service`` annotation set to true). This is
meaningful when running Cilium to setup a clustermesh.

K8s Nodes synchronization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Similar to K8s services, Cilium Operator also synchronize Kubernetes nodes

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Similar to K8s services, Cilium Operator also synchronizes Kubernetes nodes
```

information to the shared KVstore.

When a ``Node`` object is deleted it is not possible to reliably cleanup
the corresponding ``CiliumNode`` object from the agent itself. The operator
holds the responsibility to garbage collect orphaned ``CiliumNodes``.

CNP/CCNP node status GC
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Similar to the effect of ``Node`` object deletion on ``CiliumNode``,
Cilium Operator cannot remove the status corresponding to a node in a

> CNP/CCNP object. This operation of node status garbage collection from

Reviewer 5: Maybe expand the acronyms once? You use them elsewhere, but either in a list for CRD registration, or later in the doc. Maybe something like:
```suggestion
CiliumNetworkPolicy (CNP) or CiliumClusterwideNetworkPolicy (CCNP) object. This operation of node status garbage collection from
```

CNP/CCNP objects is also performed from the operator instead of the
``cilium-agent``.

This behavior can be disabled passing ``--set enableCnpStatusUpdates=false``
to ``helm install`` when installing or updating Cilium:

.. parsed-literal::

    helm install cilium |CHART_RELEASE| \\
      --namespace kube-system \\
      --set enableCnpStatusUpdates=false

Heartbeat update
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The operator periodically updates the Cilium's heartbeat path key

Reviewer 4: Here as well. This will be my last comment calling it out :). Please make sure all references are consistent

with the current time. The default key for this heartbeat is
``cilium/.heartbeat`` in the KVStore. It is used by agents to validate

> that kvstore updates can be received.

Reviewer 5: “KVstore” casing also calls for consistency.

Policy status update
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Cilium operator performs the operation of CNP/CCNP node status updates

> when ``k8s-events-handover`` is enabled. This is done to optimize

Reviewer 4: There's also another flag that allows this, `disable-cnp-node-status` or something like that

Kubernetes events handling in case of large clusters. For the node
status updates to be handled by ``cilium-operator``, all the K8s events

> are mirrored to the KVstore, which are then used to perform operations

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
are mirrored to the KVstore, which is then used to perform operations
```
Or do you mean the events are used?

via the operator. This operation is performed for both
CiliumNetworkPolicy and CiliumClusterwideNetworkPolicy objects.

> For each CNP/CCNP object in the cluster, we start a status handler. This

Reviewer 5: Who is “we” in this sentence?

Author: I have updated such instances to specify `Cilium Operator`.

handler periodically updates the node statuses for the CNP/CCNP objects

> with the status of the policy in the corresponding node.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
with the status of the policy for the corresponding node.
```

Identity Garbage Collection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each workload in Kubernetes is assigned a security identity that is used
for policy decision making. This identity is based on common workload
markers like labels. Cilium supports two identity allocation mechanisms:

-  CRD Identity allocation
-  KVStore Identity allocation

> Both the mechanisms of identity allocation requires the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Both the mechanisms of identity allocation require the
```

> ``cilium-operator`` to perform the Garbage collection of stale

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
``cilium-operator`` to perform the garbage collection of stale
```

identities. This garbage collection is necessary because a 16-bit
unsigned integer represents the security identity, and thus we can only
have a maximum of 65536 identities in the cluster.

CRD Identity GC
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

CRD identity allocation uses Kubernetes custom resource
``CiliumIdentity`` to represent a security identity. This is the default

> behaviour of Cilium and works out of the box in any K8s environment

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
behavior of Cilium and works out of the box in any K8s environment
```

Either we use US English or British, as long as we're consistent :D

without any external dependency.

The cilium operator maintains a local cache for CiliumIdentities with
the last time they were seen active. A controller runs in the background
periodically which scans this local cache and deletes identities that
have not had their heartbeat life sign updated since
``identity-heartbeat-timeout``.

One thing to note here is that an Identity is always assumed to be live
if it has an endpoint associated with it.

KVStore Identity GC
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

While the CRD allocation mode for identities is more common, it is

> limited in terms of scale. When running in a very large environment, the
> more sane choice is to use the KVStore allocation mode. This mode stores

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
limited in terms of scale. When running in a very large environment, a
saner choice is to use the KVStore allocation mode. This mode stores
```

the identities in an external store like etcd or Consul.

For more information on Cilium's scalability visit :ref:`scalability_guide`.

The garbage collection mechanism involves scanning the KVStore of all

> the identities using prefix(``id/``) search for identity keys. For

Reviewer 5: This is not easy to read. Not sure what `using prefix(``id/``) search` refers to. Maybe rephrase?

each identity, we search in the KVstore if there are any users of that
ID. The entry is deleted from the store if there are no active users.

CiliumEndpoint garbage collection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> CiliumEndpoint object is created by the Cilium agent for each Pod in the

Reviewer 4: We should also refer to the agent in a consistent way as well

cluster. The operator manages a controller to handle the garbage

> collection of orphaned CiliumEndpoint objects. This controller is run

Reviewer 4: Might be helpful to briefly state what an "orphaned" CE object is

periodically if the ``endpoint-gc-interval`` option is specified and
only once during startup if the option is unspecified.

Derivative network policy creation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> When using Cloud provider specific constructs like ``toGroups`` in the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When using Cloud-provider-specific constructs like ``toGroups`` in the
```

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

Cilium Operator
===============

> This document provides a technical overview of the Cilium operator and describes

Reviewer 4: The Operator is being referenced by subtly different names throughtout the doc, `cilium-operator`, `Cilium operator`, `operator`, etc. I suggest we stick to one: `Cilium Operator` and `Operator`.

Author: Ah, I think I still missed a few instances of this :man_facepalming: 
I will update the doc to make this reference consistent throughout. Thanks for pointing this out.

populated by Kubernetes in the Kubernetes ``Node`` resource.

For :ref:`concepts_ipam_crd` IPAM allocation mode, it is the job of Cloud-specific
operator to populate the required information about CIDRs in the
``CiliumNode`` resource.

Cilium currently has native support for the following Cloud providers in CRD IPAM
mode:

- Azure - ``cilium-operator-azure``
- AWS - ``cilium-operator-aws``

For more information on IPAM visit :ref:`address_management`.

KVStore operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These operations are performed only when KVStore is enabled for the
operator. In addition, KVStore operations are only required when
``cilium-operator`` is running with any of the below options:

-  ``--synchronize-k8s-services``
-  ``--synchronize-k8s-nodes``
-  ``--identity-allocation-mode=kvstore``

K8s Services synchronization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Cilium Operator performs the job of synchronizing Kubernetes services to
external KVstore configured for the operator if running with
``--synchronize-k8s-services`` flag.

The Cilium Operator performs this operation only for shared services (services
that have ``io.cilium/shared-service`` annotation set to true). This is

> meaningful when running Cilium to setup a clustermesh.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
meaningful when running Cilium to setup a ClusterMesh.
```

K8s Nodes synchronization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Similar to K8s services, Cilium Operator also synchronizes Kubernetes nodes
information to the shared KVstore.

When a ``Node`` object is deleted it is not possible to reliably cleanup
the corresponding ``CiliumNode`` object from the agent itself. The operator
holds the responsibility to garbage collect orphaned ``CiliumNodes``.

CNP/CCNP node status GC
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Similar to the effect of ``Node`` object deletion on ``CiliumNode``,
> Cilium Operator cannot remove the status corresponding to a node in a
> CiliumNetworkPolicy (CNP) or CiliumClusterwideNetworkPolicy (CCNP) object.
> This operation of node status garbage collection from CNP/CCNP objects is
> also performed from the operator instead of the ``cilium-agent``.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For the same reasons that the Agent cannot reliably delete ``CiliumNode``, 
the Operator cannot remove the status corresponding to a node in a
CiliumNetworkPolicy (CNP) or CiliumClusterwideNetworkPolicy (CCNP) object.
This operation of node status garbage collection from CNP/CCNP objects is
also performed by the Operator instead of the Agent.
```

Author: I think I did a small mistake here, in the first line it should be agent instead of the Cilium Operator. Does this look good?

```
For the same reasons that the Agent cannot reliably delete ``CiliumNode``, 
the Agent also cannot remove the status corresponding to a node in a
CiliumNetworkPolicy (CNP) or CiliumClusterwideNetworkPolicy (CCNP) object.
This operation of node status garbage collection from CNP/CCNP objects is
also performed by the Cilium Operator instead of the Agent.
```

Reviewer 4: Sounds good!

This behavior can be disabled passing ``--set enableCnpStatusUpdates=false``
to ``helm install`` when installing or updating Cilium:

.. parsed-literal::

    helm install cilium |CHART_RELEASE| \\
      --namespace kube-system \\
      --set enableCnpStatusUpdates=false

Heartbeat update
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Cilium Operator periodically updates the Cilium's heartbeat path key
with the current time. The default key for this heartbeat is
``cilium/.heartbeat`` in the KVStore. It is used by agents to validate
that KVStore updates can be received.

Policy status update
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Cilium Operator performs the operation of CNP/CCNP node status updates

> when ``k8s-events-handover`` is enabled. This is done to optimize
> Kubernetes events handling in case of large clusters. For the node

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
when ``k8s-events-handover`` is enabled. This optimizes
Kubernetes events handling in large clusters. For the node
```

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

Cilium Operator
===============

This document provides a technical overview of the Cilium Operator and describes
the cluster-wide operations it is responsible for.

Highly Available Cilium Operator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Cilium Operator uses Kubernetes leader election library in conjunction with
lease locks to provide HA functionality. The capability is supported on Kubernetes
versions 1.14 and above. It is Cilium's default behavior since the 1.9 release.

The number of replicas for the HA deployment can be configured using
Helm option ``operator.replicas``.

.. parsed-literal::

    helm install cilium |CHART_RELEASE| \\
      --namespace kube-system \\
      --set operator.replicas=3

> .. code:: bash

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: shell-session
```

Similar to K8s services, Cilium Operator also synchronizes Kubernetes nodes
information to the shared KVstore.

When a ``Node`` object is deleted it is not possible to reliably cleanup
the corresponding ``CiliumNode`` object from the agent itself. The Cilium Operator
holds the responsibility to garbage collect orphaned ``CiliumNodes``.

CNP/CCNP node status GC
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For the same reasons that the Agent cannot reliably delete ``CiliumNode``, 
the Agent also cannot remove the status corresponding to a node in a
CiliumNetworkPolicy (CNP) or CiliumClusterwideNetworkPolicy (CCNP) object.
This operation of node status garbage collection from CNP/CCNP objects is
also performed by the Operator instead of the Agent.

This behavior can be disabled passing ``--set enableCnpStatusUpdates=false``
to ``helm install`` when installing or updating Cilium:

.. parsed-literal::

    helm install cilium |CHART_RELEASE| \\
      --namespace kube-system \\
      --set enableCnpStatusUpdates=false

Heartbeat update
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Cilium Operator periodically updates the Cilium's heartbeat path key
with the current time. The default key for this heartbeat is

> ``cilium/.heartbeat`` in the KVStore. It is used by agents to validate

Reviewer 4: A few more instances of `agent` instead of `Agent`.
